# Fauces

*Copyright © Faustic Inferno SL*

*Licensed under the MIT License*

## Fo16 format

Fo16 is an executable and object file format intended to be used on architectures with 16-bit addresses.

This description is still an unfinished draft and it will probably change substantially before it is considered stable.

A Fo16 file consists of the following parts:

* File header (22 bytes)
    * `fo16_uuid` (16 bytes): a mark identifying this format.
    * `cpu` (2 bytes): integer represented in big-endian order, identifying the cpu, and also the endianness of the remaining integer values in the file. It may take one of the following values:
        * `0x0000`: virtual system version 1, big endian.
    * `start_section` (2 bytes): the section number of the start section, which must be a code section. For object files, its value must always be 0xffff.
    * `start_offset` (2 bytes): the offset, relative to the first address of code in the start section, where the program must start. For object files, its value must always be 0xffff.

* List of sections: an undetermined number of contiguous sections. The last one must be an EOF section. The platform may add other restrictions to the format.

Each section is composed of a section header and other fields specific to each type of section. Sizes described as varying must be multiple of two, adding padding bytes as needed:

* Section header (8 bytes):
    * `id` (2 bytes): zero-based index of this section in the list of sections. The first section must have `id == 0`, the second one `id == 1`, etc.
    * `type` (2 bytes): the section type, which can be one of the following:
        * Code section type: 0x434f.
        * Data section type: 0x4441.
        * Symbols: 0x5359.
        * End-of-file section type: 0x454f.
    * `size` (2 bytes): size of the section in 2-byte words, not including the header. It must be consistent with the requirements for each section type.
    * `pref_start` (2 bytes): indicates the address where the section is expected to be loaded. If it is loaded at this expected address, there will be no relocations of internal references.
* Type-specific content:
    * Code:
        * `code_bytes` (`size` bytes): machine code.
    * Data:
        * `data_bytes` (`size` bytes): data.
    * Symbols: a string table and a sequence of symbol records.
        * `symbol_record_count` (2 bytes): number of symbol records.
        * `string_table_size` (2 bytes): size of the string table.
        * `string_table` (varying size) : a sequence of zero terminated strings.
        * `symbol_record` (varying size):
            * `name` (2 bytes): location of the symbol name in the string table.
            * `section_id` (2 bytes): section where the associated object is allocated. 0xffff if it is not defined in the current object file.
            * `location` (2 bytes): location of the associated object within its uncompressed section. 0x0000 if it is not defined in the current object file.
            * `object_size` (2 bytes): size of the associated object within its uncompressed section.
            * `references` (varying size): process batches until `number` or `type` are zero.
                * `batch` (varying size):
                    * `number` (1 byte): number of references in this batch.
                    * `type` (1 byte): type of references in this batch.
                        * `0`: mark of end of references.
                        * `1`: each reference takes two consecutive bytes.
                        * `2`: each reference takes bits 4 to 1 of four consecutive bytes (bit 0 is the least significant bit).
                    * `reference` (0 bytes if `type` is zero, `number*4` bytes otherwise):
                        * `section_id` (2 bytes): section where the reference is located.
                        * `location` (2 bytes): location where the reference is located.
    * End of file: no additional content after the section header.
